[Unknown]: IVM
[Amit Varma]: IVM
[Amit Varma]: ivm
[Amit Varma]: so similar, if not basically the same, in terms of language, cuisine, dress, cricket,
[Amit Varma]: and even our taste for bad escapist cinema. I'd actually go further and argue that we
[Amit Varma]: are more than siblings. We're Siamese twins. We're joined at the hip almost literally,
[Amit Varma]: bound not just by culture, but also by geography, and therefore geopolitics. And for this reason,
[Amit Varma]: everything that happens in Pakistan concerns us also. We can't afford to just ignore it.
[Amit Varma]: And elections in Pakistan are more important for us than elections in any other country.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. Today's topic is the Pakistan elections of July 25.
[Amit Varma]: Now, this conversation took place on July 23, before the elections, and you're listening
[Amit Varma]: to it on the Monday after. But that's okay, because what we discussed was not the specific
[Amit Varma]: result of the specific elections, but the state of Pakistani democracy, and what is
[Amit Varma]: at stake here. My guests today are my colleagues at the online magazine I edit, Pragati at
[Amit Varma]: ThinkPragati.com. Pranay Kotastane is our editor for foreign affairs, as well as a fellow
[Amit Varma]: at the Takshashila Institution in Bangalore, and one of the most highly regarded foreign
[Amit Varma]: policy analysts in this country. Hamsini Hariharan is the assistant editor of Pragati and foreign
[Amit Varma]: policy is also one of her beats. Before we begin the conversation, though, here's a quick
[Amit Varma]: commercial break. If this happens to be the only podcast you listen to, well, you need
[Amit Varma]: to listen to some more. Check out the ones from IBM podcast who co produced the show
[Amit Varma]: with me, go to IBM podcast.com or download the IBM app. And you'll find a host of great
[Amit Varma]: Indian podcasts that cover every subject you could think of. From the magazine I edit Pragati
[Amit Varma]: at ThinkPragati.com. There is the Pragati podcast hosted by Hamsini Hariharan and Pawan
[Amit Varma]: Srinath. There is a brilliant Hindi podcast, Puliyabazi, hosted by Pranay Kotastane and
[Amit Varma]: Sourabh Chandra. And apart from these policy podcasts, IBM has shows that cover music,
[Amit Varma]: films, finance, sports, sci fi, tech, and the LGBT community all under one roof, or
[Amit Varma]: rather all in one app. So download the IBM podcast app today. Pranay, Hamsini, welcome
[Amit Varma]: to the scene and the unseen. Thanks, Amit. Great to be back. Yeah, thanks for having
[Amit Varma]: us. So now we're recording this on the 23rd of July and the 25th, obviously the elections
[Amit Varma]: in Pakistan. So what I wanted this episode to be about is not so much what the outcome
[Amit Varma]: will be, because it will be known by the time you listen to it, but we don't know it yet.
[Amit Varma]: But more about what is the landscape of politics and electoral politics in Pakistan and how
[Amit Varma]: it's kind of evolved. So Pranay, just give me sort of a quick update, like I'm speaking
[Amit Varma]: purely from a layman's perspective. What is Pakistani democracy? Is there such a thing?
[Guest 2]: The Pakistani democracy is quite elusive, actually. And that's been perplexing for many
[Guest 2]: of the people around. And the way we've tried to characterize it is that Pakistan is actually
[Guest 2]: not one geopolitical entity, but two of them. One is the putative state of Pakistan, which
[Guest 2]: actually has its flag, a PM, a PM's car, and all that paraphernalia with it. But the more
[Guest 2]: important one is something what we call the military jihadi complex. Now, the way we define
[Guest 2]: it is that it is a dynamic syndicate of the military, militants, the jihadists, the radicalists,
[Guest 2]: and political economic structures, which basically have their own foreign policy and domestic
[Guest 2]: policies. And they try to assert their relative dominance over this entire thing called Pakistan.
[Guest 2]: So it is this MJC or the military jihadi complex, which actually is in control of the corridors
[Guest 2]: of power in Pakistan, and it is the one which determines what will happen. And even in this
[Guest 2]: election, if you see it, the most important opinion that matters is not the one that comes
[Guest 2]: out of opinion polls, but the opinion of the military, and the military seems to have made
[Amit Varma]: its choice. So what's really the history of this military jihadi complex? Like, it hasn't
[Amit Varma]: always existed, I'm assuming. But at the same time, like, would you say that the dominance
[Amit Varma]: of the military was something written in the DNA of the Pakistan state in terms of how
[Guest 2]: it was formed?
[Guest 2]: Yes, actually, it is, it has been existing since the emergence of Pakistan. And in fact,
[Guest 2]: there is a great book by Steve Wilkinson called Army and the Nation. And it tries to lay out
[Guest 2]: a comparison between the history of the Indian Army and the history of Pakistani Army and
[Guest 2]: why both of them diverge in terms of the political roles that armies play in both states. And
[Guest 2]: it's a fascinating account of that. And the military jihadi complex has its root right
[Guest 2]: from the emergence of Pakistan. There have been several constitutions that Pakistan has
[Guest 2]: had several stages where the military was in direct control of the government. And even
[Guest 2]: now, even though there is something called a Pakistani PM, do you know who's the Pakistani
[Guest 2]: PM now, for example?
[Guest 2]: Give me a minute while I Google it.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, right. You need to Google it. I think you might know the PM of some other neighboring
[Guest 2]: state, but it's difficult. Let's say Maldives, you would know who is right. But in Pakistan,
[Guest 2]: it's difficult because the current guy who's been installed is someone who's not even a
[Guest 2]: big guy in his own political party. He was only installed because Nawaz Sharif sort of
[Guest 2]: confronted the Pakistani military and the military jihadi complex thought that he was
[Guest 2]: getting too big for his shoes. And hence he was booted out. So if I have to say what are
[Guest 2]: the broad trends that have taken place over the last few years, let's look at it first
[Guest 2]: from a foreign policy angle of Pakistan. One, the narrative that the MJC has been selling
[Guest 2]: all these years that they are the protectors of Pakistan and the world would be worse off
[Guest 2]: if they weren't there. That kind of narrative has weakened over the last few years. The
[Guest 2]: Americans who are backing the Pakistani military just because they thought there was no better
[Guest 2]: option, they chose to believe so, are also frustrated with it. So if you see over the
[Guest 2]: last few years, the aid that Pakistan army got has significantly declined. So from a
[Guest 2]: foreign policy angle, there is a pressure. The amount of options that Pakistani army
[Guest 2]: had have reduced now. That's one big thing. In the domestic side, what you saw was last
[Guest 2]: time Nawaz Sharif, his party called the Pakistan Muslim League, Nawaz, won a landslide elections.
[Guest 2]: They won around 178 seats out of 342. And it was the first time when a democratic transition
[Guest 2]: actually took place from one democratic party to the other. Big, big event right after 70
[Guest 2]: years. And even though that happened, after that Nawaz Sharif sort of did a lot of things
[Guest 2]: to change Pakistan and most importantly, and where the Pakistani military didn't like it
[Guest 2]: is where he started questioning the ISI, etc. on what they have been doing in regulating
[Guest 2]: the jihadists. And this came out as a leaked report in a famous newspaper called Dawn.
[Guest 2]: And that's when the Pakistani military started to go behind him. And hence he was overthrown.
[Guest 2]: And he was forced to exit. There was a non entity was made the PM. So these are the two
[Guest 2]: things. The third one is what is happening on the Pakistani border with Afghanistan,
[Guest 2]: which I guess Hamsini can tell you better. Yeah, something that I wanted to talk about
[Guest 1]: was the rise of the Pashtun Taifus movement. So what's been happening is that since 2015,
[Guest 1]: there's been supposedly a crackdown on the Tariq-e-Taliban Pakistan. And so the Pakistan
[Guest 1]: army launched something called Operation Zarb-e-Azab. And this meant that a lot of people who were
[Guest 1]: in the area were arbitrarily detained and harassed and all of that. And this is not
[Guest 1]: new also in the federally administrated tribal areas of FATA, which comes under, it doesn't
[Guest 1]: come under the Pakistani constitution. So what happened is from 2015, there have been
[Guest 2]: small protests. Just to correct, it does come under the Pakistani constitution, but the
[Guest 2]: laws which apply to these people are different from the laws that apply to the other Pakistanis.
[Guest 2]: So there is something called the FCR and their draconian laws. For example, one person doesn't
[Guest 2]: have one vote in those areas, whereas the other Pakistanis have. Here there is something
[Guest 2]: called a community vote, things like that. Really crazy colonial stuff, which still continues
[Guest 1]: to this. Yeah. And another thing is if you do something, then members of your family
[Guest 1]: will be detained and so on. So they are really draconian laws. So what's happened over the
[Guest 1]: last year is that this movement started calling for, you know, dignity for the rights of Pashtuns.
[Guest 1]: And it's the first grassroots movement in recent history in Pakistan that's managed
[Guest 1]: to affect an outcome that the Pakistan army was not really favorable to. So one of the
[Guest 1]: things that they were able to do about a month ago was merge two provinces in Pakistan, Khyber
[Guest 1]: Pakhtunkhwa and FATA. And this has been a demand for a very long time so that there
[Guest 1]: would be better governance and so on. But this is the first time that the change has
[Guest 1]: actually been mandated. And this goes on to show that there is a lot of dissatisfaction
[Guest 1]: on the ground. The people aren't really happy with the way that the civilian government
[Guest 1]: has been acting simply because the civilian government does not have a lot of power.
[Amit Varma]: And correct me if I'm wrong, but one sense in which this uprising is different from past
[Amit Varma]: uprisings is that past uprisings focused to a certain extent on identity politics and
[Amit Varma]: Pashtuns versus arrest and so on. While this was really focused strongly on individual
[Amit Varma]: rights and on just being treated as citizens and so on. Is that a correct formulation?
[Guest 2]: No, I would suggest it is still largely it is being seen as a Pashtun movement itself.
[Guest 2]: The word itself means Pashtun protection movement. But are they agitating for the same sort of
[Guest 2]: things they were in the past? Yeah, it's not that they are arguing for a Pashtunistan or
[Guest 2]: anything like that. They are arguing for Pashtuns to have the same rights that other Pakistanis
[Guest 2]: have, essentially that. And the unique thing about this is that the leadership is not affiliated
[Guest 2]: with any political party. So it's tough for the Pakistani army to curb it. They have immense
[Guest 2]: amount of instruments to curb it, right. And the military jadhi complex excels in that
[Guest 2]: they can manufacture charges, get forced disappearances. It's a very famous term in Pakistan, which
[Guest 2]: is called namalu mafrads. These are unidentified persons, they emerge out of nowhere, and they
[Guest 2]: will just abduct you. Very, very common happened to a lot of Pashtuns. And in fact, that is
[Guest 2]: why this entire movement started. And the leader of this, for example, is a guy called
[Guest 2]: Manzoor Pashteen. He's a young chap has no political history. But he went around Fata
[Guest 2]: and there was a march, a lot of people joined him on the way. So it's what Hamsini said
[Guest 2]: a grassroots movement, which really caught on and the Pakistani army was caught unawares.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, and what the movement has done differently from other movements, as Pranay said, is that
[Guest 1]: it didn't take up any political affiliations, even at the end of it after the two provinces
[Guest 1]: were merged, and a lot of people were saying, you know, what next for the movement? The
[Guest 1]: leaders of the movement were saying maybe individuals will take up political contest
[Guest 1]: if they want to, but the movement as such is not going to back anyone. And while it
[Guest 1]: was happening, it was suddenly seen as you know, an important vote that they had never
[Guest 1]: counted before on because traditionally Pashtun votes go to the PTI that works, the Pakistan
[Guest 1]: Tehreek-e-Insaf, that is in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. So this was seen as a new demographic that
[Guest 1]: has never come to the foray before in Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: And just sort of going back to the first point you made, Pranay, about the army no longer
[Amit Varma]: the military jihadi complex been weakened over the last few years. And I remember the
[Amit Varma]: early 2000s before 9-11, Pakistan was economically pretty much on the verge of collapse and someone
[Amit Varma]: like I visited Pakistan to cover the Indian cricket tour of 2006. And I'd also written
[Amit Varma]: for the Wall Street Journal and so on in that time. And I remember someone at that point
[Amit Varma]: telling me that we think of, we don't call Al-Qaeda Al-Qaeda, we call it Al-Faida. Because
[Amit Varma]: what happened with that was that the army suddenly got a spurt of validation and you
[Amit Varma]: know, it could justify itself in much stronger times, in much stronger terms and a lot of
[Amit Varma]: funds poured in from abroad because you obviously looked as Pakistan as a key ally in the war
[Amit Varma]: against terror and the military jihadi complex just grew stronger. Now, one reason for the
[Amit Varma]: military jihadi complex growing weaker, obviously, is that the West has figured out that these
[Amit Varma]: guys are not allies, they are playing a double game. But is it also the case that even domestically,
[Amit Varma]: people are more empowered or more disillusioned against the army? Is it like a two way thing
[Guest 2]: happening here? Yes, that's true for some section because look at it like this. So Pakistani
[Guest 2]: military jihadi complex, everyone now knows that they are the ones who are in the driver's
[Guest 2]: seat. And in spite of them being in the driver's seat, things haven't changed a lot, right.
[Guest 2]: And in fact, the gap between India and Pakistan has also been widened significantly. So in
[Guest 2]: a sense, there is this disillusionment that whatever we were promised, and the military
[Guest 2]: being the protectors of the ideological frontiers have not delivered. So there is that sense
[Guest 2]: of alienation which has come in. But because the military jihadi complex is still the most
[Guest 2]: powerful formation, it can, you know, there are these, for example, every year, there
[Guest 2]: are these surveys, which keep getting held everywhere. And still Pakistani army gets
[Guest 2]: some 75% ratings in the most trusted institution of Pakistan and all that. So that kind of
[Guest 2]: continues. But I guess yes, there has been some disillusionment that we aren't getting
[Guest 2]: what we are. Most recent example, actually, like just yesterday, there have been street
[Guest 2]: protests in Punjab, people saying ISI Murdabad and all that. That's very, very rare for it
[Guest 2]: to happen in Punjab. Second, what has also changed the fact is that there have been terrorist
[Guest 2]: attacks in the heartland of Punjab over the last few years. So that again, has set a question
[Guest 2]: back in the army's court that what happened, you were the guys who are going to protect
[Guest 2]: us against India and against all the terrorists. But now, even the gardens of you know, there
[Guest 2]: was an attack in a park in Punjab in Lahore. So even those places aren't safe anymore.
[Guest 2]: So that has sort of weakened domestically. And would it be your case that you know, when
[Amit Varma]: Indians typically think of Pakistan as an enemy nation, what they actually thinking
[Amit Varma]: of is a military jihadi complex, and not so much the you know, like Pakistan civil society
[Amit Varma]: at this point, seems fairly fed up themselves of the military jihadi complex.
[Guest 2]: No, that's a very good point. Actually, that's why I was trying to say that look at Pakistan
[Guest 2]: as two entities, there is this one entity, which you can't probably, you know, sort of
[Guest 2]: get you on your side, because they have defined their existence as opposing you. And that's
[Guest 2]: a military jihadi complex, right. So maybe the long term solution for the for that entity
[Guest 2]: is just that resist, we need to resist it for now and hope that we dismantle it in the
[Guest 2]: future or it gets dismantled on its own. But the other side is not inherently inimical
[Guest 2]: to India or might not be so it at least it can be changed. And an evidence for that is
[Guest 2]: like what you see happening in a Kashmir, for example, over the last two, three years,
[Guest 2]: Pakistan could have done a lot more if it wanted to. And I it's my sort of assertion
[Guest 2]: that actually they haven't done a lot. And a lot of problems which are of the recent
[Guest 2]: times are our own problems and the way we've handled Kashmir politically, but Pakistan
[Guest 2]: has been a peripheral player in this, but it's not been the main person which is doing
[Guest 2]: things from behind, which was the case a few years ago,
[Guest 2]: Your case is if they wanted to, they could have, they could have and they didn't. So
[Guest 2]: why didn't they? They didn't because as you see, last few years, Nawaz Sharif was the
[Guest 2]: one who was trying to assert himself politically. And there were some overtures on both sides.
[Guest 2]: And they sort of tried to figure it out that, you know, maybe we need to get our acts in
[Guest 2]: the domestic sphere first together and then see what we have to do with India. So there
[Guest 2]: was and remember the terrorism increased significantly within Pakistan, right? So there was backlash
[Guest 2]: internally as well. If Punjab is getting bombed internally, they said, how can we support
[Guest 2]: terrorism elsewhere? So this entire narrative of Pakistan having backing terrorist elements
[Guest 2]: sort of had weakened over the last few years, right?
[Guest 1]: And do you think that this is one of the reasons Nawaz Sharif also faced pushback from the
[Guest 1]: army that he was trying to control terrorism and didn't let the terrorists affect what
[Guest 2]: was happening?
[Guest 2]: He was questioning those guys. And that's what the report in Dawn said. And that was
[Guest 2]: a bit too much to ask. And that's why what happened and he was declared that he was not
[Guest 2]: sadiq and amin, right?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, what is a sadiq and amin? You told me before you began recording, but for the benefit
[Guest 2]: of the listeners.
[Guest 2]: It's fascinating Pakistan has so current constitution, which is in force in Pakistan was the one
[Guest 2]: which started in 1973. And after that, an article was inserted in Zia ul Haq's time,
[Guest 2]: an article 62, which said that a person who is elected to the legislative assembly, he
[Guest 2]: should have adequate knowledge of Islamic teachings and practices on the obligatory
[Guest 2]: duties prescribed by Islam, and he should abstain from major sins. And the clause also
[Guest 2]: said that candidate should be sadiq and amin. So it means honest and righteous. Now you
[Guest 2]: can understand how vague this is. So the Pakistani military jihadi complex often uses this clause
[Guest 2]: to just take people out which whom they don't like, and the way they do now is very intelligent.
[Guest 2]: So earlier, like back until the 1990s, they could just overthrow the political outfits
[Guest 2]: and the army guys could become the president and military martial law administrators like
[Guest 2]: what Pervez Musharraf, Zia ul Haq and all those guys did. But now, there will be a backlash
[Guest 2]: internationally even within Pakistan, right? So what they do is more intelligent things,
[Guest 2]: more sophisticated things, they get the judiciary to front this. So the judiciary will say that,
[Guest 2]: okay, Nawaz Sharif has been involved in Panama paper leaks, and he is no longer sadiq and
[Guest 2]: amin. So he should be thrown off. And then you have this entire set of another guy coming
[Guest 2]: in who the Pakistani army wants, which is quite marvelous. Yeah, in fact, that's why
[Guest 1]: the recent dismissal of Nawaz Sharif and his putting an arrest out for him for 10 years,
[Guest 1]: he's supposed to be jailed. It was called judicial coup, because that's what it was.
[Guest 1]: It was orchestrated by the Pakistan army. So the army basically controls the judiciary
[Amit Varma]: and uses it as a tool when it wants to. Yeah. So you know, I want to ask you guys about
[Amit Varma]: the current elections. But before I do that, a slightly deeper question going back to the
[Amit Varma]: background that you were giving me before the start of the episode about the army's
[Amit Varma]: predominant role in Pakistani politics, which is so different from the army's role in India
[Amit Varma]: and thank goodness for that. And can you give me a TLDR of how the Pakistani army, the military
[Amit Varma]: jihadi complex as it has become now, became dominant in Pakistan politics right from 47.
[Amit Varma]: And if that is a structural reason, then why should it change now? I mean, is there any
[Guest 2]: hope of it ever changing? Yeah, the structural reason for the Pakistan
[Guest 2]: army's dominance was, now Pakistan was born a very insecure state, right? And it always
[Guest 2]: perceived it so. So for the first few years, the biggest chunk of their budgetary allocation
[Guest 2]: was in defense itself. So, in a sense, it was the army and the armed forces which got
[Guest 2]: a head start over the other institutions. And in a fragile state, which was just beginning,
[Guest 2]: it was only the army which sort of seemed to work, right? And remember, during the British
[Guest 2]: times as well, they had allocated big canal colonies along the Indus and given it to the
[Guest 2]: military guys, etc. So, these were also the people who were the richer ones, the well-educated
[Guest 2]: ones, and now also more important from a public finance point of view. So, these people had
[Guest 2]: a head start and that sort of they then you had the first coup which came up and you had
[Guest 2]: Ayub Khan taking over the reins. So, it was born that way, you know, and that sort of
[Guest 2]: has continued. The army has never allowed the other putative state to actually emerge.
[Amit Varma]: And was it like, as in our case, was there ever a sort of constitution which tried to
[Guest 2]: lay down the rules of the game? Or how did that go? Yeah, the often the constitution
[Guest 2]: was made by the army guys itself. After they ruled, they had a new constitution, it changed,
[Guest 2]: etc. So, it always tried to give a veneer of democracy and a legitimacy which you would
[Guest 2]: find acceptable, but always it was clear where the power center lay. And to your question
[Guest 2]: of whether it will change or not, the only thing sort of which can change is if this
[Guest 2]: Pakistani military jihadi complex is no longer seen as the one which can deliver the goods
[Guest 2]: for the Pakistanis. And I guess, at least the trend is now in a direction where Pakistanis
[Guest 2]: themselves are questioning where we are going with what we've done. And, you know, the countries
[Guest 2]: around Pakistan have managed to do much better things. So, they are questioning that. And
[Guest 2]: that's why you are seeing a lot of this civil unrest with the PTM, etc., which is coming
[Amit Varma]: up. And therein lies the hope, I guess. In fact, this is why I keep saying that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, just because we view Pakistan as the enemy, which as you correctly pointed out,
[Amit Varma]: there are two aspects of Pakistan and the military jihadi complex as enemy, just because
[Amit Varma]: of that, we shouldn't cut down on trade with them. In fact, if anything, we should expand
[Amit Varma]: free trade with them, we should expand person to person relations, because all of those
[Amit Varma]: things will only strengthen Pakistani civil society vis-a-vis the military jihadi complex.
[Amit Varma]: So that is sort of another front in the battle we have to fight against.
[Guest 2]: Right. But I would say, I have a slightly different take to it, at least we shouldn't
[Guest 2]: think of all these big overtures, you know, a PM meeting a PM and all that, because the
[Guest 2]: past evidence shows that whenever such big jhumlas take place, immediately after that,
[Guest 2]: the military jihadi complex strikes back. There is instance after instance where this
[Guest 2]: has happened. So, it's better to not, you know, insert a finger into the eyes of the
[Guest 2]: MJC by doing these big events. Yeah, you could do it at a first start with a back channel
[Guest 2]: talks, NSAs to NSAs, and then slowly open people to people contacts, but anything which
[Guest 2]: is big, which questions the military jihadi complex, who's, you know, the foundation of
[Guest 2]: that is that they are going to protect against India, right? So, if you start to question
[Amit Varma]: that, then MJC strikes back. So, like the MJC, maybe what you're saying is MJC may be
[Amit Varma]: wounded and insecure, but they're still the biggest beast in the room and you don't want
[Amit Varma]: to roil them up too much. We'll shift to talking about the current elections, which I find
[Amit Varma]: hopelessly complicated and hard to understand right after a brief commercial break.
[Unknown]: Hey, it's been another great week on IBM. If you aren't following us on social media,
[Unknown]: please do. We're IBM podcast on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram. On Sairaj Says this
[Unknown]: week, we have Satyanshu Singh, filmmaker, writer and head of content development for
[Unknown]: AIB First Draft. His journey from doctor to writer is a fascinating one. On the scene
[Unknown]: and the unseen, Amit is joined by Pranay Kotastane and Hamsini to decode Pakistan's experiences
[Unknown]: with democracy. On Keeping It Queer this week, Naveen speaks to Parmesh Sahani, author and
[Unknown]: head of the Godrej India Culture Lab. Hustle Science marks its season finale with fitness
[Unknown]: YouTuber Abhinav Mahajan. And on Geekfruit, Tejas and Jishnu give you the greatest hits
[Unknown]: from this year's San Diego Comic Con. It's time for you to catch the third story from
[Unknown]: Croc Tales with Anand Sivakumaran. This one is called Freddie Ki Fiat Ho Gai Flat. And
[Unknown]: now, onto your shelves.
[Amit Varma]: Pranay and Hamsini, welcome back to the scene and the unseen. So, help me make sense of
[Amit Varma]: what's happening in these elections. You've had Nawaz Sharif sort of being defined against
[Amit Varma]: a military jihadist complex, which is on the downswing both in terms of what the world
[Amit Varma]: thinks of it and in terms of dealing with domestic matters. So, they've used the Supreme
[Amit Varma]: Court as a puppet to get Nawaz out of the way. They've installed a puppet prime minister.
[Amit Varma]: And now you have elections coming up. So, lay it out for me. What's at stake here? Who
[Guest 1]: are the players in this game? And what's likely to happen?
[Guest 1]: Before we get into these elections, I think it'll be good if Pranay, you told us how the
[Guest 1]: National Assembly elections in Pakistan actually work, right? With respect to vote shares in
[Guest 2]: provinces and so on.
[Guest 2]: Yeah. So, think of it this way, that the electoral seats, basically Pakistan is dominated by
[Guest 2]: one state. Okay. So, the total number of seats in the assembly are 342. Not all of them go
[Guest 2]: for elections. They are sort of, some of them are reserved seats, etc.
[Guest 1]: For minorities and women.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, minorities and women. So, around 270 will go to vote in these elections. Now, the
[Guest 2]: Punjab dominance is that nearly 170 seats out of 342 belong to Punjab. Okay. So, the
[Guest 2]: second highest state, which is Sindh, it is less than half of that number. It has 75 seats.
[Guest 2]: So, anyone who controls Punjab sort of is the big person in town. In the last elections
[Guest 2]: now, Nawaz Sharif's party really sweeped the entire Punjab. Okay. And they had close to
[Guest 2]: 178 seats or something like that. So, because of that, they were the big party there. Now,
[Guest 2]: what's happening now? Because PMLN has now lost favor of the Pakistani military jihadi
[Guest 2]: complex, there are some other formations who are coming up. Now, there is something called
[Guest 2]: the Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf, which is led by Imran Khan and his election symbol obviously
[Guest 2]: is a cricket bat. I don't know why not a ball, but it's a cricket bat. So, Imran Khan is
[Guest 2]: the, his party actually rules this thing called the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, which is another state.
[Guest 2]: That state just has now 50 seats totally. These are the two big formations. The third
[Guest 2]: formation is the Pakistani People's Party, which is Benazir Bhutto's party. Now, it is
[Guest 2]: being led by her son. Now, over the time, PPP's influence has waned. And even in these
[Guest 2]: elections, it is only restricted to sins that they might perform well. These are the three
[Guest 2]: big parties. Some other parties are now Pakistani military jihadi complex is also trying to
[Guest 2]: mainstream militants. So, there is always like a palimpsest of militants who keep coming
[Guest 2]: into the electoral setup. Earlier, you had some jihadi elements. Now, you have these
[Guest 2]: guys Hafiz Saeed has a party called the Milli Muslim League that might contest. So, there
[Guest 2]: are... And they are backed by the military jihadi complex. Yeah, it is a part of the
[Guest 2]: military jihadi. They are the jihadi part of the military jihadi. So, it is very clear
[Guest 2]: they are trying to mainstream it. There are militant Barelvi outfits also. There is a
[Guest 2]: Pakistani Labaik party. And they are also trying. So, there are many, many layers of
[Guest 2]: these militant guys who are also sort of contesting. So, these are the main guys in the elections.
[Guest 2]: Now, Pakistani army has made its choice. It looks like Imran Khan is their man and a few
[Guest 2]: reasons for that. First, they hated the PM and Nawaz Sharif. And even though Nawaz Sharif
[Guest 2]: won't be contesting elections, they fear that his family will still be in control and he
[Guest 2]: might again come back. So, they are trying to restrict them. They are doing that in a
[Guest 2]: few ways. One, they are obviously helping Imran Khan project his party's name everywhere.
[Guest 2]: Second, they have split the Pakistani Muslim League itself. And there was this Interior
[Guest 2]: Minister Nisar Chaudhary who was from the Nawaz Sharif faction. Now, he split from the
[Guest 2]: PMLN and he is contesting elections alone. And he was allotted the symbol of a jeep,
[Guest 2]: which very obviously evokes images of the Pakistani military itself. And not only did
[Guest 2]: that happen, a lot of people started quitting PMLN. And by some strange luck, a lot of these
[Guest 2]: independents have been given the jeep symbol. So, this is like the jeep party. So, this
[Guest 2]: is the jeep party, which is sort of, they don't call themselves a party, by the way.
[Guest 2]: They are saying we are not a group, but we know what it is.
[Guest 2]: What might happen is because PTI does not have a great presence in Punjab, these jeepers
[Guest 2]: plus the PTI might collaborate and you might have a formation which can run.
[Amit Varma]: And also Imran in the past has sort of shown his sympathy for militants anyway. Of course.
[Amit Varma]: So he's always sort of been, you know, wanting to get into the good books of the military
[Guest 2]: jihadi complex. Yeah, he is. I mean, the party was started
[Guest 2]: by, now the interesting thing is even Nawaz Sharif's party was bankrolled by the Pakistani
[Guest 2]: army back in the 80s when Benazir Bhutto was just rising. This was late 80s.
[Guest 2]: So as a counterpoint to that. So, there was this formation called the IJI,
[Guest 2]: which was formed and Nawaz Sharif was a businessman who was brought in to do this. But over time,
[Guest 2]: Nawaz Sharif now with, you know, 30 years of politics behind him wanted to do things
[Guest 2]: his own way and that was too much for the Pakistani army.
[Guest 2]: So now you have another case here and they are trying to form this party called the PTI.
[Guest 2]: Obviously, they emerge, they come up every time the Pakistani army wants them to do,
[Guest 2]: wants them to create all these noises. So yes, it looks like they are the Pakistani
[Amit Varma]: army's guys. All very entertaining. So, is the army also
[Amit Varma]: going to rig the elections in a manner of speaking? Because like there is an army person
[Amit Varma]: at every booth, for example, they're pretty much controlling the physical logistics.
[Guest 2]: Yeah. So that's, that's the interesting thing. And I don't know how that would work out.
[Guest 2]: My guess is they have already rigged the election. You don't need to rig the ballot process to
[Guest 2]: rig an election, right? You can rig it. They'll just put Nawaz Sharif behind bars, put his
[Guest 2]: daughter behind bars. So, I mean, if that is not rigging, what is?
[Guest 1]: You face so many insurmountable difficulties. And I think you wouldn't want to rig the election
[Guest 1]: anymore because the army still wants that veneer of credibility, right? At some point,
[Guest 1]: they still, they've always maintained the prop of a civilian government to show that
[Guest 1]: there is some aspect of democracy within Pakistan. So if they go any further, then I think they
[Guest 1]: will be tipping that balance and they won't want to do that necessarily because then they
[Amit Varma]: can go back to military rule. But does that matter anymore? Because everyone
[Amit Varma]: in the international community, for example, knows the real score anywhere, right?
[Guest 1]: No, I think it does matter because recently Pakistan has been put on the FATF, right?
[Guest 2]: The Financial Action Task Force, for not cracking down on terrorism and money laundry and things
[Amit Varma]: like that. And I don't know, what do you think, Pranay?
[Guest 2]: I think the difference this time is because Nawaz Sharif is extremely popular still. And
[Guest 2]: in fact, after what the army has done to him and put him behind jail, etc, there's a greater
[Guest 2]: sympathy wave for him as well. So he's no walkover either. He's a seasoned politician.
[Guest 2]: So if the Pakistan army goes overboard, there might be, you know, pushback from the supporters
[Guest 2]: of Nawaz Sharif, which didn't exist earlier because, you know, there was only one game
[Guest 2]: in town earlier. But now there is at least a hint of some political opposition.
[Amit Varma]: Is there space for such a backlash to express itself? I mean, if it's basically an army
[Amit Varma]: run country, they can just clamp down on any dissent, right?
[Guest 2]: Yeah, that might well happen. And in fact, that's what is happening. But for example,
[Guest 2]: there were a lot of protests in favor of Nawaz Sharif as well. And, you know, voices were
[Guest 2]: raised even after he was removed because of this clause. So in a sense, they won't be
[Guest 2]: able to keep it under wraps if this happens. So there will be some fallout, there will
[Guest 2]: be protests, which I don't know whether they are ready to take that challenge.
[Guest 1]: Yeah. So when he was debarred from government, right, he did a long march from Islamabad
[Guest 1]: to Lahore, saying, you know, yes, I've been debarred from office, but I still have clout.
[Guest 1]: And similarly, when the judgment now that sentenced him to 10 years of prison was out,
[Guest 1]: he and his daughter were actually in London and protesters stormed through the apartment
[Guest 1]: and eventually he chose to come back to Pakistan, even though he knew he was facing arrest.
[Guest 1]: And I think these are all symbolic of the fact that the Sharifs know that there is a
[Guest 1]: sympathy wave for them, that they will command it in that sense.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's which is kind of ironic, given that they were once cronies themselves in
[Guest 2]: a sense of the army, like you pointed out.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, that is true. But you know, once you have power, I guess the logic of power works
[Guest 2]: differently and I think he probably thought that he can do more things on his term rather.
[Amit Varma]: Power changes everybody. I mean, power is like the most fascinating subject of modern
[Amit Varma]: times.
[Guest 1]: There is this famous quote from the Harry Potter, right? When Voldemort in the first
[Guest 1]: book says, there is only power in those who are too weak to seek it. And I think that's
[Guest 1]: a great way to explain what is happening in Pakistani politics.
[Amit Varma]: A profound geopolitical insight from someone who lost. Times do change and power does shift.
[Amit Varma]: So okay, so here's the million dollar question then. All this is happening in Pakistan, the
[Amit Varma]: military jihadi complex is asserting itself and Imran might, interestingly, our listeners
[Amit Varma]: will know this as they're listening to the podcast, we don't at the time of speaking,
[Amit Varma]: Imran might come to power or whatever happens. What are the repercussions for India?
[Guest 2]: So from the Indian angle, these elections don't really matter. They are all interesting
[Guest 2]: for us to observe. But still, what we are seeing is the military jihadi complex, we
[Guest 2]: have to face that particular side of the equation. And there will be someone who will be a crony
[Guest 2]: of the military jihadi complex. Earlier, you at least had some guy who could question the
[Guest 2]: military jihadi complex in a limited sense. But yes, there was now you will end up with
[Guest 2]: the situation where there is a military jihadi complex and the political party is just going
[Guest 2]: to relay whatever they want them to relay. So we have no other option but to try to see
[Guest 2]: how this military jihadi complex's role can be managed. And that's what we are left with.
[Amit Varma]: And what is Imran's attitude towards India in terms of his public utterances and so on?
[Guest 2]: What is his approach? Extremely antagonistic towards India. He's,
[Guest 2]: in fact, his favorite criticism of any of his political opponents is they are India
[Guest 2]: supporters, or they did something which was in India's interests or something. And everyone
[Guest 2]: for them is a raw agent. So that's the standard thing with PTI. It won't change.
[Amit Varma]: Right. And we are also no doubt raw agents. Pranay and Namsini, thanks a lot for coming
[Amit Varma]: on the podcast. It's been very illuminating talking to you.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do follow Hamsini on Twitter at Hamsini H
[Amit Varma]: and follow Pranay at Pranay Kotas. You can also follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen at seenunseen.in. Thank you for
[Unknown]: listening.
[Unknown]: Every week comes a show with three people come together to tell you about stuff they
[Unknown]: like a movie, a TV show, a book, and other stuff.
[Unknown]: Tune in every Monday on the IVM podcast app to IVM Likes.
[Unknown]: Batman approves this message.
[Unknown]: Thank you, Batman.
[Unknown]: Batman.
[Unknown]: Hi, I'm Vishal Gondal, an entrepreneur.
[Unknown]: I've had the chance to meet and understand
[Unknown]: how some of the super achievers have hacked their way
[Unknown]: to success, and they have done spectacular innovations.
[Unknown]: Now, I take a closer look at these people's lives
[Unknown]: to find out what lies beneath the force only
[Unknown]: on The Vishal Gondal Show.
[Unknown]: Episodes out fortnightly on Wednesdays
[Unknown]: on the IVM website, app, or your favorite podcasting platform.